
 
Introduction
Empirical research on civil society in China is extensive, while theorisation is still in infancy.  This paper contributes to that gap by examining how the informal civil society (ICS) can contest state power through value-driven practices, using graffiti as a case of everyday, non-institutional activism. Grounded in Foucault’s   framework of power and Gleiss et al.’s dimen-sions of political agency in non-democratic contexts,  the analysis conceptualises graffiti as a tool of discursive resistance that allows individuals within the ICS to articulate alternative val-ues and negotiate visibility under conditions of control. The graffito is chosen as an analytical entry point because forms like materialist-driven protests have been studied extensively com-pared to anonymous day-to-day activism.  Ephemeral and decentralised, it allows for publicly visible, yet anonymous engagement by regular people, while escaping immediate repression. As fieldwork is not reasonable in the scope of the paper, it relies on existing rich literature of graf-fiti in general and in the Chinese context specifically for a conceptual approach, with Mainland China as reference point.  The approach is illustrated by Zhang Dali’s Dialogue and Demolition series (1995 – 2005) as an artistic point of reference.
Literature Review
Public – Power - ART
<p> So how can anti-establishment graffiti production allow the Chinese ICS to articulate value-driven contestation, and how does this practice relate to existing power structures? Calhoun  defines civil society as a “society distinct from the state, organized ideally as a realm of liberty, with freedom of religion, association, business activity, conversation and the press”. On the basic level, this is people interacting with strangers, elevated to larger-scale systems through modernisation. With the market ruling, private choices are indirectly translated, although no op-portunities for self-conscious choices by the public are given. It follows, “that civil society is a matter of collective choice”,  and collective good is easiest achieved through organised citizens. From another angle, the state and state-like forms of organisations are best left out of civil soci-ety for cohesion, as civil society is intrinsically distinct from the state. Lastly, Calhoun focusses on culture as “crucial to the capacity for agreements among individuals that is important to other conceptions of civil society”.  Drawing from these perspectives, civil society will be discussed as a matter of direct exchange between people based on ever-evolving culture(s), which makes communication possible, connects individuals, and penetrate all structures erected by the public. 
However, people get excluded from the public discourse and hegemonic culture may be con-tested, e.g., by the A4-movement.  In China, free speech is heavily restricted, as examples of A4-protesters show, who got detained and only released on bail after four months.  This con-duct is facilitated by corresponding legislation that allows imprisonment of disrupters of ‘social harmony’ and regulates further specific prison times for ‘ring leads’, ‘other participants’, or ‘rumour spreaders’.  Arguably, the phrasing is deliberately vague to flexibly administer it to everyone who is perceived as enemy by the state. This does not only happen on an individual basis, but organisational too. Snape & Wang found that the CCP uses several mechanisms to erase the realm of social organising they find illegitimate, while further seemingly relaxing the requirements that must be matched to become a legitimate organisation under the Charity Law, only to then be managed through party-means.  Especially easier registration is however not appealing to activists in volatile areas like LBTQ+, as these groups fear that will be heavily re-stricted by the government once they turn into an NGO.  Document 9 by the CCP provides further inside into the party’s ideology.  There, ‘civil society’ is conceptualised as a tool origi-nating in the morally corrupt, overly individualistic West and used to undermine the Chinese state and the CCP’s governance to disrupt societal cohesion. The party argues that especially hegemony must be defended, as governance and state existence are built on it. This directly re-lates to a style of public management Snape & Wang called command civil society, where dif-fering ideologies and organisation forms do not have a space under the authoritarian structure the CCP has and is building. 
These different interests, groups and organisational structures, like the state, the party, and civil society, that exist in varying states of conflict, collaboration, and coexistence, serve as manifold bases of interaction among all actors. 
And interaction is precisely what makes civil society valuable: As argued by Calhoun, issues important to citizens and how they organise their lives together are being negotiated through dialogue, which leads to the formulation of common goals or values. The achievement of these ideas of common good then typically gets assisted by the state or powerful organisations. Be-cause the definition (a “society distinct from the state, organized ideally as a realm of liberty, with freedom of religion, association, business activity, conversation and the press“ ) is fo-cussed on democratic civil societies, however, it needs to be adapted to the Chinese context. Therefore, the term ICS, comparable to 草根组织 (latinised to caogen zuzhi), is suggested.  It carries the discussed sentiments of civil society without association, business activity and the press, as all these are commonly either registered with or directly controlled by the state, e.g., through the Charity Law.  These institutions therefore only leave marginal space for free opin-ion formation and communication. ICS furthermore frees room for (non-Western) forms of less formalised organisation inside communities based on factors like caste, kinship, or class, with-out ties to the government in organisation or funding, thus, rejecting integration into a command civil society. 
This goes together with Foucault’s notions on antiauthoritarian struggles as an issue of individ-uality: While separating oneself from existing structures, agents demand solidarity, a stop to the break-up of communities. Furthermore, they contest ivory towers of knowledge hording and the authority to interpret what is valid knowledge. Lastly, these struggles explore intrinsic iden-tities and reject abstract determinations by bureaucratic and scientific institutions, as well as at-tribution by state ideology and the economic system. Overall, they attack the net of power and its mechanisms, e.g., knowledge dissemination and interpretation of single entities. They do so from a position of everyday life, through transforming themselves from categorised objects to acting subjects who demand to be recognised by others as such. Additionally, anti-authority struggles ostensibly have in common, that they are typically transnational, are aimed at the power that targets the activists, are immediate in the sense that they are aimed at tangible indi-viduals that exercise the power and aim at finding a most immediate solution to their problem. </p>
Generally, struggles either reject (ethnic, social, and religious) domination, exploitation in the economic system, and submission to others, the latter being the most present in modern times through proceeding individualisation. The issue in modern societies is hence that people are separated, while still grouped by governmental structures. Integration into the structure is con-ditional. The domination or its overthrow is marked by the marginalised group manifesting in a universal and large extent, linking power relations to strategic relations through interactions across history.  In the context of the ICS, however, it must be explicitly mentioned that this is not a concrete social movement, for example in Rucht’s sense.  As in official civil society, dif-ferent points of view are negotiated. Some people also have a stronger need for change and pro-tests than others, and some are perfectly aligned with the command civil society without engag-ing with it in a meaningful way, e.g., joining an association.
Public – Power – ART
Foucault’s conception of power here helps understand these different forms of negotiation. Power is not a property, but a network of relations ingrained into all interactions. It is a pro-gressive, indeed productive, as exercising power always evokes several possible counteractions which are then countered, and so on, linking back to ever-evolving culture(s). Individuals and groups therefore do not stand outside of power; they act within its boundaries as subjects capa-ble of action. Power mechanisms become visible best through points of resistance, as seen in Foucault’s account on anti-authoritarian struggles, which is why this framework is adopted here. 
In China, this power network manifests top-to-bottom through legislation, surveillance, and control of free speech. The authority over urban space itself becomes a site to exercise power, as it is regulated who can appear and speak publicly. The ICS is embedded in precisely this structure; value-driven counter conduct must therefore occur within this system, too. It does not oppose power from the outside but operates within the field, adapting to cycles of repression and openness, where tools and knowledge are developed during times of openness, and then adapted during more repressive eras to less visible spaces.  To make these processes more tan-gible, Gleiss et al. conceptualised four modalities of engagement through which ICS actors manage politics.  Here, ‘politics’ includes the power of social problem definition and identity- and interest construction of social groups by the state and the civil society, hence politicising actions formerly seen as apolitical and vice versa through discursive practices.  With a focus on ICS, positioning denotes how actors regulate their relations to the state to maintain opera-tional space and manage risk, through informal ties or avoidance, for instance. Advocacy in-cludes the representation of collective concerns to the state or public on behalf of affected groups. In China, this typically occurs through subtle means. As Dai & Spires show on the ex-ample of Chinese environmental NGOs, this representation employs three strategies: maintain-ing the established informal ties with officials, framing goals in state-compatible terms, and mobilising social support via the media.  Caring for others, accordingly resource provision, moral support, or information sharing, often begins as apolitical engagement but can evolve into critique of state shortcomings. It goes hand in hand with advocacy as this dimension serves as legitimisation for speaking up. Ultimately, identity formation unites these processes, because it shapes how actors define themselves, who belongs to the group, and helps finding a common language to articulate its demands. Through these modalities, the ICS illustrates Foucault’s principle that power circulates through relations. Each dimension constitutes both an effect and a transformation of power, which reveals how control and agency coexist in everyday practice.
Public – Power - Art
Now, graffiti comes into play to translate these considerations into practice. Next to being this abstract room, public sphere is also a very concrete space, especially in cities: urban surfaces. Public space in the scope of contestation is accordingly defined based on Lefebvre’s right to the city  as well as the concept of street furniture like walls, curbs and the like. Urban surfaces are meant to be appropriated by a city’s inhabitants to (re-)claim the city, whether legally right or not, balancing opportunities and restrictions rendered by the state in codified and non-codified ways, like the Charity Law and Document 9.  Therefore, if utilised, graffiti serve as part of the network of social connections among the inhabitants claiming the city from their owners, a stance also adopted by Valjakka.  People see them, discuss them, and interact with graffiti.
Ross  identified the empirically observable dimensions “legal/sanctioned/authorized versus illegal/unsanctioned/unauthorized; content/aesthetic; perpetrator; and location” for graffiti typol-ogy, aligning with Valjakka’s questions for graffiti interpretation along the how, when and what was written, where it is written and who was involved in the process in relation to the sociopo-litical context to transform public space into a room.  Consequently, graffiti by the perpetrator ICS happens in the public place, is at least unauthorized and is made using spray and other paints to either write words or tags, the latter being anonymous signatures by graffiti spray-ers.  In agreement with Valjakka, tags are included as they are not only a signature, but a care-fully crafted expression of the writer’s very self’s identity. 
Typically, Zhang Dali’s, based in Beijing, and Tsang Tsou-choi’s, local to Hong Kong, names fall when discussing the origin of modern graffiti in China. Hong Kong is likely the starting point from where graffiti spread over China from the 1990s onwards. The culture blossomed in the Mainland until the crackdown of civil society started in 2013; graffiti places fell victim through demolition and a supposed choice each sprayer had to made: Either fall in line, e.g., working on state commission, or stop making graffiti in public places altogether. 
Consequently, graffiti is not an art form that is or can be appropriated solely by ICS. 
In fact, graffiti are often encouraged and employed by the Chinese government e. g., in Xi’an, Wuhan and Chengdu (cf. Figure 1).  Reasons for commission are usually to beautify urban spaces, mobilise masses for events, appeal to global tourism, and showcase China’s creative prosperity in a controlled environment.  Therefore, graffiti occupy a legal grey zone in China and are not necessarily seen as defiant or as an act of vandalism, but as artistic, religious and political expression, at times also acknowledged as a reference to tizi ( 题字) and dazibao               (大字报) by the public.  They have been especially supported by the established Chinese art scene from the very beginning through incorporation into Beijing’s 789 Art District, for in-stance.  Graffiti are primarily used as a form of escapism or hobby for young people from the middle and upper class, not at least because Chinese spray cans are rather expensive and small-er compared to the West.  Common features used are Chinese characters for writing and visual elements close to the Chinese culture, like dragons or pandas.  To be tolerated, they, however, need to be apolitical, not overly spectacular, or too disseminated on the internet. 
Pan calls these state-directed efforts imitation of graffiti or “artifical madness”,  that lost its Western expression of individualism and meaning. Moreover, Western-style graffiti are per-ceived as “harmless doodles”,  visually appealing with no deeper content, regardless, by both the public and the state. Criticism in the form of graffiti is found in rather remote places, like old construction sites, and so encoded through wording and visuals they are hard to interpret or enacted by modifying state propaganda images.  
So while not overly used in this way yet, graffiti are a technology of resistance embedded with-in the same power network that seeks to regulate it. Through visibility, anonymity, spatiality, and temporality, graffiti can interact with that network. In Foucauldian terms, graffiti constitutes a counter-conduct, because it neither fully rejects nor obeys authority but reconfigures the field of visibility itself. Urban surfaces, where state power literally materialises are potential arenas of negotiation. The wall embodies Foucault’s economy of power as a canvas that evokes action and counter actions. Here, the modalities of civil engagement and components of graffiti find their spatial analogue, too: ICS actors select sites at a specific time of the day, date or other sig-nificant period. They chose and potentially encode slogans that transport their message, which mean something to a certain group and are meant to evoke at least thoughts, if not further inter-action on the audience’s side. The finished product serves to establish and maintain the artists’ identity through common themes and individual tags.
Graffiti thus acts as a discursive practice through which ICS actors could negotiate power. The practice itself, as well as the process of graffiti design and site selection, are political. In China’s command civil society, these inscriptions may visualise one side’s effort of what Foucault calls the perpetual political task of monitoring and redirecting power’s flow. 
Methodology
To elaborate graffiti as a tool of the Chinese informal civil society (ICS), it was theoretically conceptualised as a discursive practice. The Dialogues and Demolition series by the artist Zhang Dali (1995 – 2005; exemplified by Figure 2 & 3) now serves as an illustrative case to explore how contestation practically manifests within the power networks of non-democratic societies through Gleiss et al.’s modalities. 
Analsyis
Born in 1963, Zhang Dali is an internationally acclaimed visual artist, based in Beijing. His Di-alogue and Demolition series transformed condemned walls of Beijing into sites of silent dia-logue during the later phase of Reforming and Opening-Up, an era of privatisation and out-sourcing of previously governmental services. Abstract traces of an “empty man without identi-ty”  over and over again, often accompanied by the tags AK-47 and 18K, were sprayed over demolition signs and on walls of abandoned sites. In 1998, he additionally began to carve out shapes of said empty man (Figure 1). The tags reflect his understanding of pressing issues in the then contemporary Chinese society: Money, as 18K is related to the quality of precious met-als and jewellery, violence through referencing the firearm AK-47. In his interpretation, societal indifference results from both.  He typically used black paints. The series incited discussions about Beijing’s future, belonging in general, and the state of the economy among citizens, bu-reaucrats and scholars. Hence, he did not show outright defiance yet interfered with power’s literal architecture through the exposition of asymmetries: state authority versus individual pres-ence, legal owning versus personal belonging. The silhouettes temporarily rendered the fading past visible.
Figure 2 Work Nr. 121 shows Zhang’s techniques of stone cropping and graffiti, including his tags AK-47 and 18K (Zhang, 1998).
Modalities
Regarding positioning, Zhang operated in in-betweens: not dissident, not state-aligned, neither in past, nor in the future, not individualistic, not community orientated; demolition and con-struction at the same time. Condemned walls were strategic low risk zones with maximised vis-ibility. In Foucauldian terms, this approach exploits microscopic gaps in the power network. That logic parallels the ICS’s organisational positioning of operating through unregistered groups or private companies that exist between legality and illegality, or personal opinion voic-ing, that reads as apolitical on the surface but is layered with sarcasm. Both rely on the man-agement of being just enough visible to remain socially meaningful, yet not enough to trigger repression. In terms of advocacy, it is striking that he does not utilise text to communicate next to his tags. His silhouettes alone act as claims to existence within the public room, implicitly demanding a right to the city and resisting the erasure implied by demolition. By employing the empty man, he extends the claim from himself to all his fellow inhabitants, speaking from in-side the group. Through his work, he expresses solidaristic care of other citizens, as the empty man can be interpreted as memorialisation of communities that had to leave the buildings prior to demolishment. Easy to recognise, each painting creates a visible continuity across urban space. Lastly, identity formation emerges through the repeated silhouettes and the use of self-portraiture, comparable to a meme in the sense of a repeatable cultural unit.  Because the repeti-tive silhouette functions as a self-portrait and collective portrait simultaneously, the distinction between individual and group collapses and a shared identity emerges. This mirrors the ICS’s process of identity construction through language and practice (Gleiss et al., 2019: 13). The sil-houette thus becomes a subject within the power network and each graffito marks not rebellion from outside but self-production from within power’s architecture.
Visibility, Anonymity, and the Politics of the Surface
Graffiti placed in public space indirectly expect an audience, making visibility, its associate ano-nymity, and spatiality central points in Zhang’s works. They are both central to Foucault’s and Gleiss et al.’s frameworks, too. Visibility is the condition of recognition but also of vulnerabil-ity; anonymity protects but hinders immediate communication beyond the surface level. Moreo-ver, graffiti in Zhang’s practice does not merely depict resistance. It spatialises it. The wall be-comes both the medium and message of contestation. In appropriating the surfaces where pow-er manifests, Zhang responds to said power and initiates further responses through transform-ing them into places for dialogue in Lefebvre’s sense. Nevertheless Zhang created art meant to be destroyed by marking condemned walls. In photographic documentation, however, Zhang reclaimed control over visibility, because he transforms an ephemeral practice into a permanent trace by archiving his graffiti. Ultimately, Zhang’s graffiti exemplifies the relational nature of power theorised by Foucault and operationalised through the modalities Gleiss et al. identified. In China’s non-democratic context, such practices remain within the field of power but subtly redirecting its flow. Seemingly apolitical walls so can become a political matter, instigating dis-cussions about Beijing’s urban development, belonging and the individual’s place in all of this. 
Adaptation and limitations
In theory, Zhang’s work is effective because it uses a simple, repeated human silhouette on comparable sites with a set repertoire of tools and colours, all connected to the sociopolitical environment he comments on. However, it is reported that regular citizens did not know how to interpret the graffiti.  A factor at play is likely that he was one of the first graffiti artists in Chi-na. The general public was not familiar with the art practice itself, and especially not with its subversive nature. 
To draw lessons from this effect regardless, and as graffiti are still commonly associated with the state or ‘Western doodles’, it is strongly argued to integrate some explanatory text into the design, or bandwagon motives from already established movements and easily understood symbols, e.g., a white rectangle, which would remind the audience instantly of the A4-movement, while abstaining from culturally decorative elements. Moreover, non artists can adopt Zhang’s memetic behaviour by producing high contrast, easily reproducible visual tokens that communicate on a broad base, comparable to stickers, potentially using stencils for con-sistent repetition and accessibility. This procedure might assist them in separating their message from commercial forms of graffiti, while making it easier for their audience to identify the mes-sage contained. Conveniently, not a lot of organisation (if any) is needed to apply this tool, so it is accessible to individuals and groups. Factually, many different voices would make the dis-course even livelier and elevate graffiti’s position as a tool of contestation.
Keeping the cost of spray cans and potential legal repercussions in mind, the paint materials are of concern, though. Spray cans are difficult to hide in one’s belongings because of their size, they possibly leave marks on hands and clothes, make noise when in operation and likely insti-gate public attention, hence endangering anonymity, if not used in secluded spaces. Markers, for example, are more inconspicuous, harder to remove than chalk, and easier to apply than wall colours and sprays. Therefore, they seem to be ideal materials for graffiti making by regular ICS members and are less associated with typical commercial and propaganda graffiti. The big-gest hurdle, however, might be that ICS members first need to become aware of a social prob-lem, they then must define. Through individualisation in power submission, they also likely have a feeling of impotence (‘What can an ordinary person do by themselves anyway? And then of all people me?’). When progressing from there to planning and executing contestation, fears of repercussions under arts. 105 & 293 pose additional obstacles, especially when inexpe-rienced in street art production. To stick with the example of Zhang: He discovered graffiti dur-ing his stay in Bologna, Italy, in the first half of the 1990s. There, he developed at least a proto-type of his empty man and was inspired to make art in the public space.  Therefore, it is very much unlikely, that he would have used spray paint in his artistic practice if he would have stayed in China, yet alone in public without the Italian role models.
Conclusion
This paper set out to ask how anti-establishment graffiti can enable China’s ICS to articulate value-driven contestation, and how this practice relates to existing power structures. Through Foucault’s relational concept of power and Gleiss et al.’s modalities of civic engagement, graffi-ti was conceptualised as a discursive tool through which ICS actors act within power’s net-works. The analysis of Zhang Dali’s Dialogue and Demolition series illustrated how position-ing, advocacy, care, and identity formation in non-democratic contexts can materialise through graffiti’s visual and spatial properties. However, while graffiti can function as an effective me-dium of counter-conduct, its potential strongly depends on the sociopolitical climate in China. Graffiti might not be understood by the audience and private, political graffiti production is not widespread at all at the moment. Instead, it is currently captured by mostly the state, which is why ICS members first and foremost would need to develop an individual style to make them-selves stand out. Therefore, while a valuable tool, graffiti’s wider application in public contesta-tion remains largely aspirational today and may only advance in a future cycle of greater open-ness.
 
